Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
When we first started Veterans of the Valley a few months back, it was my plan to introduce you to my friend Al Hanson early on.
Well, different problems came up, but now, finally, you get to meet Uncle Al.
It's on his and Ruby's back porch in Bryan that I first started my passion for telling the story of Brazos Valley veterans.
It was on that back porch that I met Glenn Morgan, Dr. J.F.
Cooper, W.S.
Edmonds, Sonny Franze.
All have been guests here.
And there, I met many other proud members of the greatest generation.
And it was there I first heard the story of Sergeant Al Tex Hansen, radio operator of the 55th Troop Carrier Squadron, U.S.
Army Air Corps.
Al Hansen has lost count of how many missions he flew in World War II, his craft delivering supplies to the troops on practically every island of the Pacific Campaign.
Al, what a pleasure it is to have you here.
I've been wanting to have you here for a long time.
And finally, by golly, we made it.
We got to move along because there's so much to your story, but I want to go to radio operator school in South Dakota.
That's the first time that you experienced flying in an airplane.
And that's the first time you really got scared.
Talk about that.
Went to radio school in South Dakota and school was 24 hours a day, eight, three shifts, eight hours a day.
They wanted radio operators.
Well,
I finally graduated.
I had to take about 16 words a minute.
That's how you graduate.
A lot of them flunked out.
They didn't want to be radio operators.
Well, I didn't want to at first.
So, okay.
Also in mechanics, I got two degrees.
One in mechanics and one in radio.
Well, before you could get your degrees, well, you had to fly.
Let's do go for it.
Went out to this little airport there, and there was this Piper Cub.
and they were made out of cloth and shellacked, that's all it was.
The wings, sides, everything.
So I got in there and I had my little table there about radio deals, so I had to call into the base
And they'd call me back to check me out and everything.
So we got about 4,000 or 5,000 feet.
Boy, the South Dakota is beautiful.
All these red borns and cattle and stuff.
And this pilot said, if they didn't know your name, they called you Soldier.
Soldier, do you see any planes out there or anything?
No, sir, I don't see any.
Well, you know, I had my safety belt on.
He took that plane and did a complete flip.
And when we straightened out.
He didn't tell you he was going to do this.
No.
Man, my hands were almost bleeding.
Got my fingers like that.
I said, man, I wish I'd have stayed on the farm.
You know, just scared me.
That was your first experience with Clyde, but you were going to have a whole lot more when World War II came along.
The next day, we went to the building there, and they pinned my medals on my wings right there.
They put the wings on me, and so you're in the Air Corps.
You're flying.
In the Air Corps, like you get base pay is $80.
But if you're flying, you get 50% more.
So that's, that's what, $40 more.
Right.
But okay, go ahead.
What's the next question?
I'm waiting.
You went ahead.
You went on to Denver.
You were in Ogden, Utah.
Then you got the good news that you were going to go back to Texas.
Well, let me tell that about Ogden, Utah.
Okay.
Ogden, Utah.
Cold and ice.
The Mormon people there were nice.
So every day I'd go look at that bulletin board.
There it was.
Alfredo Hanson, Baytown, I mean, pardon, Austin, Texas, Del Valley.
Bergstrom.
Bergstrom Field.
You're going back home to Texas.
Boy, tears came in my eyes.
It had gone for months.
And they gave me a 14-day delay in route to get there.
So I went to Baytown, married my beautiful wife, Ruby Novosad, May Novosad.
And so they took me back to the base, to Bergstrom, got me there at midnight.
And I showed the guard my papers.
He took me right in there and said, you want to go to the mess hall first?
Or you want to go to the barracks?
I said, well, I'll go eat something.
Walked in that mess hall.
There was a bunch of soldiers over, officers, everybody in the corner, about 25 or 30.
So I got me a plate, went up there, and the guy said, the cook said, how do you want your eggs?
Bad.
I said, over easy.
I went to the next guy, you want a hamburger or bacon?
You hadn't been treated this nice before.
Oh, my God, no.
And, man, I was going to sign up for 20 more years.
And coffee and jelly and everything.
So I sat there by these guys just listening.
And this MP that brought me up here, he stayed with me.
And they started talking about, they just got back from flying.
Hell, it was at midnight.
I said, all right.
So he took me to the base the next day.
I said, okay, you checked your record, Hanson, you're going to start flying.
Oh, boy.
What did I do?
They put me pulling those gliders.
Well, I know radio communications.
We pull those gliders.
You got pictures over here in the show in a minute.
And, boy, that was scary.
You get that glider off.
The rope would stretch about 10 foot.
Here we go.
And, boy, when it tightened up, that plane would slow down at C-47.
It slowed down.
And boy, he'd rev those engines, and we'd finally get it off.
We'd circle, you know, LaGrange, Bastrop, circle.
And they had a big circle out there with these planes laying.
And over the side was just bunches of them that had been crashed.
But every one we pulled, every glider we pulled, landed right in that circle.
But you preferred the motorized aircraft, right?
Oh, yeah.
We got some pictures to show later.
You went on to Pathfinder School, I know, in Indianapolis.
That's right.
Let's fast forward to when you went over to the Pacific.
You went to Hawaii first, right?
Yeah.
Let me tell you about California.
Oh, yeah.
I got in line there, going to the mess hall, and this guy was right behind me.
And I looked at him and, man, he looked bad.
He said, you're probably going to the Pacific.
I said, I sure am.
He said, well, I just got back.
Look at here.
His fingernails were started black.
And his face was yellow from taking the alibi.
Then he said, you ought to see my feet.
I said, no, I've seen enough.
Boy, that's when I said, I wish I'd have never signed up.
That scared me.
So we got on the C-54.
We went to Hawaii.
From Hawaii, Johnson Island, to Rawa.
To Rawa was bad.
It was all shot up.
And just before we landed in Tarawa, the pilot told us it was on the C-54.
He said, coming in to Tarawa, just before you get to all these islands, there's just beautiful palm trees, just beautiful.
But boy, when we landed in Tarawa, it was shot up ever.
We lost a lot of troops there.
Indeed, indeed.
And then Guadalcanal.
Go ahead.
Let's see.
Guadalcanal, then New Guinea.
I think, there we go.
We got a map right now.
This is your map, actually.
And it's a little bit hard to see right here on television, but this is a map of the islands, the Philippines.
And the red arrow that you see is pretty much your route where you went.
And you just flew and flew and flew and flew as a radio operator.
You spent more time in the air than on the ground, right?
That is right.
Talk about, Al, exactly what your job was as a radio operator in World War II.
What was involved in that?
All right, sir.
On the bulletin board, they'd say, they'd have the names there, where you're going and what plane you're going on.
And I always did this.
I carried my .45.
I carried a compass.
I carried a knife and a cigarette lighter.
I carried that religiously when I get on that plane.
And the pilot never did have to say, buckle up.
I knew better than that.
I'd always buckle up.
And as soon as I'd get airborne, when we leave the ground, all it was was voice modulation, the pilot talking to the tire.
But once we got airborne and settled out, that's when I got on the radio.
I called the base, tell them where we're going.
And then they gave me paper to look at.
It's all by key now.
Just by the key.
We'll tell that story in a minute.
Go ahead.
I did it.
And the earphones on and nobody bothered you.
You had your own little table on your desk, your radio up here.
The tubes were that big, that big around.
That's what they had back then.
And I'd call into the base.
Then I'd call where we were going, our destination.
And I'd always get the latitude and longitude from the navigator.
There's five in the crew.
And he'd give me that information.
Then I'd call in number of the plane, a longitude, latitude, and ETA, estimated time of arrival.
I was thrilled then.
And that was your job?
Yes, sir.
I want to take a look at a young Al Hansen and describe this picture that we're showing right here.
This is your crew in front of your aircraft.
You're the one, I believe, kneeling down on the left as we're looking at that, right?
Talk about that picture.
When was it taken?
Do you recall?
Probably in 43, I guess.
When you were in flight training school, or was this already over in the Pacific?
No, that's in flight training.
In flight training school.
Yes.
And that's young Sergeant Al Hanson on the bottom on the left side as we're looking.
Do you remember who any of those other folks were?
Yes, sir.
The guy behind me is Captain Al Kemp.
He was from Austin, Texas, and he always favored me because we were both Texans.
Right.
And the other one was a pilot, I mean, a co-pilot, one on the right outside.
He was our navigator.
He was a Jewish fella, and we liked it.
He was really smart.
Man, he was intelligent.
The other one on the bottom was named Frank Dirk.
He lived in New York City.
He was the mechanic.
The mechanic on the plane.
Right, right, right, right, right.
Want to give people an idea a little bit of a better look at the kind of plane that you were a radio operator on.
I think we've got a photograph here.
There we go.
I'm holding it.
That was the planes you flew on mostly.
Is that right?
Yes, sir.
I love that plane.
That's a 47.
The other was a 46.
And this hauled everything.
I mean, you all took supplies to R-Truth, just about everything except bombs you took.
No, 50 caliber.
We hauled cases and cases of 50 caliber.
We hauled Japanese printers.
And when they'd get on that plane, they'd be shackled at the feet.
the hands behind them, and would they bow?
Man, they never had any back trouble.
Boy, they could just bow and bow before we'd put them on the plane.
Then we'd haul nurses.
Ammunition.
We like that hauling nurses.
Really, yeah.
You like that part of it.
What else did you take?
You took a lot of stuff.
As a matter of fact, I'm going to say some numbers here.
Jeeps, ammunition, just you name it.
Baggages.
Oh man, whatever there was.
I want to give people an idea.
I'm looking at a commendation that's dated May the 30th, 1945.
And it was for your squadron.
And listen to these numbers.
This is what, during the month of March, 1945, in one month's time, during that month, operating out of San Marcelino, the airplanes of the 55th Troop Carrier, that was your troop, your squadron, lifted a total of 10,319,000 pounds of cargo in one month.
including 368,000 passenger pounds, 9,951,000 freight pounds on a total of 1,280 individual flights involving a daily average of 15 different available types of airplanes.
So when I say that you were actually in the air more than you were in the ground, I'm not really exaggerating.
The only time I'd get scared is that taken off and landed.
Mm-hmm.
You're loaded.
The freight might, the jeeps or something might shift.
Sometimes they did.
But I was always buckling.
Every time I take off, I do the sign of the cross.
And when I landed, I did the sign of the cross.
Scared me.
Really?
Talk about how you knew you were going to fly.
They put towels on the tent.
Oh, wait a minute.
Yeah.
And they're squattering.
If you're going to fly, you look at the bulletin board and you put a towel on your tent.
Then you put a towel on your bed.
It's about 4 o'clock in the morning.
Here comes this guy with a flashlight to wake you up, and you go over and eat dehydrated potatoes, dehydrated milk.
Everything was dehydrated.
And sometimes you had that stuff on the shingle.
These guys know what I'm talking about, stuff on the shingle.
Right.
Yeah, everything wasn't great to eat.
I know that.
And a lot of the supplies that you dropped were dropped by parachute, different colored parachutes for different items that you dropped, right?
I came out one morning.
I came out there, and there was nothing in the plane.
There was nobody there.
I said, we're going to fly in the crew chief.
We always check the plane out.
And here came his truck.
And these guys start throwing off these parachutes.
They're different colors.
I think white was water and red was ammunition and whatever else.
And so they loaded it up.
And I said, well, it's going to be interesting.
We're going to drop these.
The hills are full of Japanese.
What got me with my car that say,
So-and-so is secured.
Boy, that was for the people in America.
Those hills are just full of Japanese.
Yeah, but it was secure.
The airstrip, I never was bombed.
They'd always bomb the Navy over there.
The bombs would come over, but they'd go to the Navy.
They didn't care about the airstrip.
But they had a big foxhole back there, but we'd jump in there and sometimes be a foot of water in there.
We didn't care.
I know one idea of what they call secure.
I believe you were telling me a story about when you went into New Guinea.
and a fellow that was there.
And New Guinea was really, really messed up.
They met a fellow that talked to you.
Oh, well, let me get back to you with the parachute.
I said, man, I thought this was going to be fun.
We went up those mountains and had that door open.
See, that unbalances the plane too.
And these guys got up and they had to run it, run it, tell the pilot.
coming oh you're about 500 feet to the west he'd run back and here we circling and all this time we're right over these hills and the heat waves coming up and down and that plane would be bouncing up and down i mean it was scary right and and oh you're 300 foot to the south just kept circling finally located you couldn't see them solid trees and they just
started throwing out those parachutes.
And one time your plane was coming in and there were some problems, I believe, with the right side, with the right wing?
No, it was the right engine.
It was always going out.
We would come in there with some troops to Manila.
Manila was still on fire.
Not Manila, the bay.
Manila Bay was on fire.
And Manila was burning, too.
So here we come in with these troops and, boy, that's what you love a pilot.
That right engine started coughing and spitting.
Well, it was either Nichols Field or Clark Field.
And there was planes there that patterned.
You have to get in a pattern.
There was V-25, V-51s, and C-47s.
Voice, modulation, he called the tire.
Well, all these pilots were in that same frequency.
They could hear what he was saying.
Look, I got an engine going out.
I got some troops.
I'm coming in.
No, you get in a pattern.
He said, y'all better look out.
Boy, he slipped that plane right in there.
come out and land in that damn thing.
I know one of the groups that you really respect because of what they did at World War II, and we've had guests here that were members of the Navy Seabees.
Oh, yeah.
Talk about the Seabees and the work they did.
You couldn't have done your job without the work that they did.
Oh, man, they worked on those airstrips at night with bulldozers and stuff.
Some planes come over, they just crawl under to get beside it, and we'd head for the foxhole.
Oh, man, and they'd put that metal lattice like he talked about.
What I can't understand, of all these landings we made on coral rock, sand, dirt, and this metal lattice, never had a blowout.
I can't figure that out.
We never had a tire blowout.
Well, that says something for the CBs and the airstrips that they built.
It says something for the tires also, I guess.
The fellow in New Guinea, it was a funny thing that you went to New Guinea and you said, boy, this is really bad around here.
And what did he say to you?
Oh, yeah.
We got off this big old C-54.
We were nice, the uniforms on.
We got off the C-54, just top stuff.
We'd been to Pathfinder School.
We were number one.
Got off and got down there, and we went over to talk to the truck driver.
I said, there's a lot of crashed planes over there.
I said, man, y'all really had it tough.
Tough?
Yeah, you should have been here before we had the Coke machine.
Man, that was crazy.
So another time here, we went to Mindora and Mindanao.
There's two, I get them mixed up.
I get confused on those two, but we had either one and picked up these paratroopers.
And 101's or something like that, I can't remember the name.
We picked those parachutes up, we're gonna take them to Manila.
See, Manila's already been slowed down a lot.
So just before we got to Manila, coming up there was kind of the side of it.
And I was up there where my radio is, and the plane was going like this.
And the pilot said, Texas, what's going on back there?
I went back there.
And these guys said, we dropped on Corregidor.
Oh, he got killed there.
He got shot there.
And I went up and told the pilot, I said, those guys dropped on Corregidor, 101st Airborne.
He said, we're going to show them a show.
Well, he dropped that plane right down, went around this way with it, where they could see out of the window, circled that thing, went the other way, come back there, and they really enjoyed it, 101st Airborne.
Oh, man.
It was towards the end of the war, I know, Al, that you were at Okinawa getting ready for a potential ground
war with Japan, but it was about that time the war ended.
After the war ended, talk about your unit, what it became, and what its job was.
To me, this is very interesting, and a lot of people don't know this part of the history of World War II.
Okay, here we are.
Just planes, we're loaded with troops, we're ready to go.
They gave us a little book, How to Speak Japanese, and I've got some of it written down in that little book, and .45s, knife, and all that, and they
spoke to, don't cause any trouble.
And here we go, we landed Tachikawa airstrip.
I got a gal in Tachikawa, that was the word going around there.
We landed there, and oh, it was shot up, side of the building with 50 caliber holes in them.
And we landed there and got settled down.
And boy, all of a sudden, about six or eight little Japanese kids running around the plane, Sato, Sato, Sato.
Well, I didn't know what that was.
So one of the guys said, that means sugar.
So we went in the plane, busted up two cases, which is illegal.
See, I'm still on duty, so I don't want to get court-martialed.
But we opened that up, gave those kids some sugar, and they just take those cubes of sugar and just throw them in the mouth like that.
And so go ahead.
So your job there was as a part of the Imperial Couriers.
Oh, that came later.
Yeah.
That's what I want you to talk about.
All right.
We made several flights around the island.
Then one day we had a big meeting, said, man, you're no longer.
You are now with an Imperial Courier.
You're with Japanese Airlines.
All right.
So we went out there, and they had painted Imperial Courier on all our airplanes.
And all we cared was Japanese officials to a different island, Korea.
I had a chance to go to Hong Kong and Singapore, but they had my name on the wall, discharged.
I said, no way.
We're looking at a photograph right now to talk about what we're talking about.
Yeah, that's at Okinawa.
This is similar to what you're talking about.
This is a plane similar to yours, and it looks like a group of Japanese businessmen that this plane is about to transport right after the war is over.
They're going to Manila.
The war is over.
They landed that plane right there at Okinawa.
Those guys are going to Manila to talk to the boss, boss, MacArthur.
And these are the type of folks that you would transport, and so you were essentially part of... The guys we carried all had suits on just like on the Missouri, had caps on and hats.
They really dressed nice.
Right.
And the Japanese were very kind to you.
Oh, man, they would bow all the time.
I've got to say one more thing about when I was at...
San Antonio Air Street.
That's right above.
In Luzon.
Luzon, right.
It's right above Subic Bay.
Well, I went out there one morning and I haven't told this, I don't think.
Go ahead.
I don't even know if I've told this or not.
Well, there's a bunch of guys under the plane.
They sent me out for guard duty.
That's why we had to do guard duty on the plane.
So I had my .45 and went out there to get in the plane, listen to the radio and whatever.
All these guys, troops were under the plane, about 10 of them.
I said, you going to fly out tomorrow?
He said, no, we're here to guard your plane.
I said, well, all right.
Well, they had hand grenades, rifles.
So I pulled the stair down and I got up there and I said, y'all want some hot cocoa or hot coffee?
Yes, sir.
I said, all right.
Now, this is illegal, what I did.
This is going to be for emergencies.
So I called two of them up there.
I said, look at the back.
There's some bee rashes back there.
Bring them up here.
Open them up.
We're going to have bacon, beans, biscuits, chocolate bars.
Man.
I started up my little kitchen there and I fed all these guys.
And then I got, just as soon as we got through eating, I said, y'all want to hear, they had their earphones all the way down and bucket seats.
Y'all want to hear Tokyo Rose?
Yeah.
So I'd get them.
What about Hawaii?
You want Hawaii?
Yeah, I can get everybody.
What about Frisco?
Yeah, let's have Frisco and get the latest news.
Go ahead.
Yeah.
Why don't I take a,
look here when we get this oh what is this that we're looking at we can sort of go out on it a little bit maybe what is this that we're looking at right there there we go what is that what is that they uh we did that's propaganda we dropped b-29s dropped those in japan that's propaganda they showed all these out if you can see all the islands oh it's sideways it's a it's a clock sideways clock so you can see it all there you go well
that with a big hand it's on uh okinawa right and it shows it's going to japan and they're next all these other islands we knocked out we captured and this is propaganda that y'all would drop from your airplane no we didn't know b-29s b-29s would yeah just to tell them you're next give up you're next you're next is that right is that right uh i want to uh
This is something that hangs on your back porch or near your back porch, and you're very proud of it.
This is your shadow box that has your medals in it.
If we can get a good shot at it, talk a little bit about what we're gonna be looking at here.
First off, here's a picture of the young Sergeant Al Hanson, and describe some of those medals for us.
Well, I have four battle stars there, and I'm not really proud of it, because these other guys,
The Marines, Army landed those places.
They did the work.
Yeah.
They got Battlestar, they got the Purple Heart, a lot of them got the White Cross.
Right, right.
I don't think I was entitled to them, but we just fly in and fly out.
Sometimes we had to spend the night because the storm was something.
But, you know, I didn't shoot it.
I'm sure we were shot at, but apparently they didn't shoot at us because they disclosed their
location than a P-47 would blast them with napalm.
Yeah, they wouldn't have shoot at us.
But you put yourself in harm's way.
And you were always in danger, I guess, of losing your life, like one of the nearly 500,000 that lost their life in World War II.
And you were decorated for that.
And I think that that's well deserved.
But you think other people deserve it more.
Yeah, I do there.
And what's funny, with Flanagan,
Nadzab to Hollandia.
You pronounced it wrong the other night.
Okay.
And that's where Bacatha was.
But we had to fly over the Stanley Mountains.
And they told us, I said, look, if you crash, these people there, these ladies there have never seen people like us.
There's headhunters there.
Just head for the coast and a submarine will pick you up.
Now, wasn't that crazy?
Indeed.
You were a former commander of the American Legion in Hearn and a former commander of the VFW right here in Bryan.
I know that's something you're proud of and your continued involvement with the VFW here.
Thank you.
It's a great organization, isn't it?
Great.
Tell you what else a great organization is your back porch.
Doesn't that mean a lot to you?
I mean, every morning, you and your friends, World War II buddies, you get together.
And you just talk.
How did that develop?
Well, it's mostly about the war, about the VFW, girls.
Things that we can't talk about, but things that we can, right?
If I got time to add this real quick.
We were flying from Okinawa.
Let's see where we were flying from.
No, we were flying from the Philippines to Okinawa.
And to get off track.
Yeah.
We had to go in on a certain frequency.
To go to that frequency, they had a submarine out there under the water with an antenna on it.
We'd fly out of that.
The pilot did all that.
I had nothing to do with that.
The pilot would fly to that signal and, boy, we'd look for that.
Because you knew when you was right over because that needle would turn like that.
We'd look around and there'd be a submarine out there.
Oh, my goodness.
Al, we're out of time.
It goes very quickly, but what a pleasure it has having my good friend.
on the show.
Thank you, Al.
I talk too much.
No, you don't.
You talk just right.
So now you've met one of my favorite veterans, Uncle Al Hanson.
I wish you could all gather some time on his back porch to hear the stories of the greatest generation.
But there's just not enough room.
I'll just keep bringing them here.
We salute Sergeant Al Tex Hanson and all veterans for their service.
And thanks to our underwriter, First National Bank.
Please join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.